# Exponential probability

## Exponential probability density function 

$$ f(x) = \lambda e^{-\lambda x} $$

where:   
 - $f(x)$ is the probability density function
 - $x$ is the value of the random variable
 - $\lambda$ is the average number of successes that occur in a specified region

The mean $\mu = \frac{1}{\lambda}$

the parameter $\lambda$ influences both spread and shape of distribution.
Higher $\lambda$ lead to curve that declines more sharply, meaning more probability mass is concentrated near $0$ 

the mean $\mu$ shows the reverse -> the expected value of distribution.

as smaller mean implies a grated likelihood of smaller values. While larger mean corresponds to more dispersed values of $x$ 

$$ p(x \le a) = 1 - e^{-a\lambda} $$

### example (0 from book)

Suppose the average time between customer arrivals at the deli counter of a Piggly Wiggly grocery store (awesome name for a store) is 4 minutes. What is the probability that the next customer will arrive at the counter within the next 2 minutes? > Figure 6.23 shows the exponential distribution for the deli counter. We are looking for the shaded area under the curve labeled P1x ... 22.

// TODO: add the figure 

$\mu = 4$ 

$\lambda = \frac{1}{\mu} = \frac{1}{4}$

$$ p(x \le 2) = 1 - e^{-2 * \frac{1}{4} }= 1 - e^{\frac{-2}{4}} =  39 \% $$


### EXAMPLE 1
During lunch hour, customers arrive at a fast-food drive-through window, on average, every 2.5
minutes. Assume arrival time follows the exponential probability distribution.
What is the probability that the next customer will arrive:
1. within the next 2 minutes?
2. in more than 5 minutes?
3. between 1 and 4 minutes?

$ \mu = 2.5 $  $ \lambda = 1 \div 2.5 = 0.4 $

1. $p(x \le 2 ) = 1 - e^{-2 * 0,4 } = 55\%$  
2. $p(x > 5 ) =  1 -  p(x \le 5 ) =  e^{-5 * 0,4 } = 14\%$  
3. $p(1 < x < 4 ) = p( x < 4 ) - p(x < 1 ) = e^{-4 * 0.4} - e^{-0.4} = 47\% $ 


### EXAMPLE 2
Assume the average time between students walking up to my desk during a statistics exam to ask
a question in a desperate attempt to gain some insight into how to solve a problem is 8 minutes
and follows the exponential probability distribution.
What is the probability that the next student will approach my desk:
1. within the next 2 minutes?
2. between the next 3 to 5 minutes?
3. in more than 10 minutes?

$ \mu = 8 $  
$ \lambda = 1 \div 8 = 0.125 $

1. $p(x \le 2 ) = 1 - e^{-2 * 0.125 } = 22.12\%$
2. $p(3 < x < 5 ) = p( x < 5 ) - p(x < 3 ) = e^{-5 * 0.125} - e^{-3 * 0.125} = 15.2\% $
3. $p(x > 10 ) =  1 -  p(x \le 10 ) =  e^{-10 * 0.125 } = 28.65\%$


# Uniform Probability Distributions

$$ P(x) = \frac{1}{b - a}; a \le x \le b $$
$$ P(x) = 0; x < a \wedge x > b $$

where:  
 - $P(x)$ is the probability density function
 - $a$ is the lower bound of the interval
 - $b$ is the upper bound of the interval

$$\mu = \frac{a + b}{2}$$

$$\sigma = \frac{(b - a)}{\sqrt{12}}$$

$$ P(a \le x \le b) = \frac{x_2-x_1}{b-a} $$

## EXAMPLE 1

Assume the time required to pass through security at a particular airport follows the continuous
uniform distribution with a minimum time of 5 minutes and maximum time of 30 minutes.

Calculate the value of f (x).


1. What are the mean and standard deviation for this distribution?
2. What is the probability that the next passenger will require less than 25 minutes to pass
through security?
3. What is the probability that the next passenger will require more than 20 minutes to pass
through security?
4. What is the probability that the next passenger will require between 8 and 15 minutes to
pass through security?
5. What time represents the 75th percentile of this distribution?

$a = 5$  
$b = 30$

1. $\sigma = \frac{30 - 5}{\sqrt{12}} = 7.2168$
2. $ P(x < 25) = P(5 \le x < 25) \frac{25 - 5}{30 - 5} = 0.8$
3. $ P(x > 20) = P(20 \le x < 30) \frac{30 - 20}{30 - 5} = 0.4$
4. $ P(8 < x < 15) = P(8 \le x < 15) \frac{15 - 8}{30 - 5} = 0.28$
5. x = 5 + 0.75 * (30 - 5) = 23.75
